The National Anthem
Nationwide in Jurant
and its 6,000 local representatives
present Howard K. Smith
with news and comment.
August 22, 1962.
Good evening. The Kennedy administration has had so much trouble getting
anything through Congress that it feels odd to report that it's about to get a highly controversial
piece of legislation through, probably with ease. The legislation is a bill to put tighter
controls on drugs. Debate on it in the Senate began a few hours ago today.
The bill was drafted more than a year ago. In committee, most of its provisions were torn out or weakened.
But now most of those provisions have been put back in and strengthened, mainly due to the tragedy of
Thalidomide. These are photos from a medical journal showing European babies born
deformed, probably because their mothers took Thalidomide, a sedative invented in Europe.
Thousands of babies were born in Europe with flaps in place of limbs and with other deformities,
due it is believed to this drug. The situation was dramatized in this country when Mrs.
Sherry Finkbine of Phoenix, Arizona, who was one of the few American pregnant women who took the
drug, went to Sweden for an abortion which was forbidden here. Her husband told reporters this week that the
operation showed the baby would have been born deformed had the abortion not been carried out.
The bill introduced by Senator Kefover of Tennessee to play stiffer controls on drugs had been
bothering in Congressional neglect. We ask Senator Kefover if it takes a calamity to get action in Congress.
Sometimes it does happen that way. How it unfortunately is hard to get people interested and
members of Congress interested in this. Something like a calamity takes place.
It's a sad commentary, but that is true. Do you think it is possible that there may be dangerous drugs still circulating today?
Oh yes, there is no doubt about it. The Food and Drug Administration has recently taken one off the market.
They admitted that the murder of 29 should never have been on the market and made a mistake as very damaging side effects.
Dr. Francis Kelsey of the U.S. Government's Food and Drug Administration was given the highest civilian award by the
president for preventing the litomide from being freely marketed in America.
Was the period between the time the application was submitted to you and the time that the application was withdrawn?
The application was submitted to us in September of 1960 and it was formally withdrawn. I believe it was March of this year.
Well during this long period weren't you subjected to considerable pressure to approve the drug?
Yes, there were numerous contacts between myself and my supervisors by members of the firm.
Was it unusual pressure, do you think?
I think perhaps it was a little more vigorous than most, yes.
Dr. Colston Warner, president of the Consumers Union and a member of President Kennedy's new committee to advise government on protecting consumers, explains why the drug control bill probably would have been defeated but for the litomide crisis.
Drug lobbyists are far more active in consumers and when you have a situation going along it's given channel,
customary practice in the drug field being what it is.
The most influential groups will be those that have Washington offices and bring direct pressure upon Congress.
In fact practically the whole bill was written by the majority of the subcommittee, the Keepover Committee, was cast out and a bill acceptable to Mr. Horasca, Mr. Dixon, and so on.
Senator Roman Horasca of Nebraska who opposed much of the original Keepover drug bill thinks our controls are already pretty good.
The litomide case is proof of it. You see that case and what happened to it happened under the law as we have had it since 1938.
So there is ample safeguards there, there are ample safeguards. Senator, is it possible that there may be dangerous drugs circulating being sold and bought today?
Oh yes, it's possible. You see that danger has existed ever since centuries ago when medicines first came on the scene to treat human ills.
After all a medicine should be construed or thought of as a poison if it is taken at the wrong time or in the wrong quantities.
That's what it is, that's why we have to have a doctor prescribing for a certain condition in a stated quantities.
There are many who think the United States pill industry is one of the most conscientious in the world.
The litomide tragedy they say began and wrote its worst damage after all in Europe and not here where it was cut short.
We will present that view and the opposing views about our drug industry and controls on it in a moment after this word from nationwide insurance.
Adam Smith, who first wrote down the laws of free enterprise economy in 1776, said the purpose of all production is to satisfy the consumer.
He added the interest of the producer ought to be attended to only so far as it may be necessary for promoting that of the consumer.
In our modern day of advertising slogans we've shortened that to read, the customer is always right.
We accept the words of that principle but we are guilty of a little hypocrisy for in fact we contradict them in practice.
America has become what is called a producer's economy. Everything is geared to help the producer.
The consumer gets little protection from rich well-organized, powerful and too often unscrupulous groups of producers and manufacturers and sellers.
We have set up big agencies in government in part to protect the consumers like the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Trade Commission and others but in fact those agencies have tended to neglect the consumer and have instead become mediators between conflicting producers for rights and favors.
Senators in congressmen know that producers organizations can summon great organized influence and wealth to elect or defeat them while consumers cannot.
So there's a tendency to be very sensitive to the wishes of producers rather than consumers.
This novel, the jungle, represented the first big effort to give protection to the consumer.
It was the compelling story of the filthy underpaid overworked life of stock yard workers in Chicago written by Uptans and Claire.
Appearing in 1906 it helped to push through congress, Theodore Roosevelt's Food and Drug Act in that year.
It made meat packers clean up their product but it did not cause them to raise wages.
Sen Claire lamented, I aimed at their hearts but I hit them in the stomach.
Government has been laggard in protecting the consumer so private organizations have moved in.
The best known is the Consumers Union, a non-profit organization which tests and compares everything you buy from insurance, automobiles, to foodstuffs and issues monthly and annual reports.
However, protection for the consumer has never caught up with the consumers need for protection from rigged prices and poor products as the number of commodities on the market multiply and their contents become much more complicated.
Senator Philip Hart of Michigan says the advent of the supermarket has increased the need.
Let's recognize that there are very few salesmen left in that supermarket. You can't talk to them. You can't really get too much information out of a live animal except the man or lady at the cash register.
When I grew up there was a salesman there. You could talk to him about the box. Generally we just wrapped up in plain brown paper but you knew what was in it.
He knew who you were. You would be back in the morning if Mother told you that you brought back the wrong stuff.
Today there isn't any live salesman in the salesman as the package on the shelf. And the lady has swept along that line in the supermarket pretty fast.
She may or may not have children tagging at her heels. Now the question is, have we ensured that that package contains the information that we would expect from the live salesman, the basic information that we would enable you to make a rational shopping choice?
I've picked up exhibits which were quite within the law as it's presently written.
But you need a aviator's slide scale chart to figure out how much it is enough.
The consumer also needs more protection because of the chemistry revolution. New insecticide sprayed over foodstuffs may have effects we don't know about.
Also chemicals are being applied to food. Aranges bathed in orange dye, apples dyed red.
Bread bleached to become snow white. Paltry dyed to look a healthier flesh color. We do not know the long range effect on consumers of other chemicals, shot into foods to keep them longer on the shelf.
No field however has undergone so much recent changes drug and medicine business. The American drug business was small until World War II.
As late as 1939 no drug factory had an annual turnover as big as for example Macy's department store in New York.
But today it has become a vast multi-billion dollar industry. One cause for the wild boom was the discovery of some wonder drugs like penicillin, streptomycin, cortisone and so on.
But the big booster was the discovery that medicine could be sold by advertising techniques that sell cigarettes and detergents.
The advertising business, a two million dollar a year business in the twenties, has become a twelve billion dollar a year business today.
It has multiplied its business that is by six thousand in a generation.
In recent years Dr. Harry Dowling told the American Medical Association in a speech medical advertising to doctors has become flamboyant, incessant and without question confusing.
Dr. Frank Firstenberg of Baltimore on advertising and drugs.
Most physicians simply cannot cope with the advertising that they see in the journal.
What has happened is the Madison Avenue techniques are pushing drugs to the physicians much the same as they're pushing soap to the housewife.
There's no question about that.
This must necessarily be passed on to the price of this advertising.
It must necessarily be passed on to consumer that it's effective for the drug houses. I did not know.
Two years ago the attention of senator keyfovers, anti-trust and monopoly subcommittee was drawn to drugs because of their high prices.
The letters came in by the hundreds and by the thousands from all over the United States.
So we started making some preliminary inquiry and we found that it was a very important matter.
So we went into this matter, preliminary, a little more than three years ago.
And we found that drug prices, by whatever criteria you take are just unreasonably high.
Are they higher in this country than similar drugs abroad?
Oh yes, I even know they may be manufactured in this country. Are they higher in this country than all countries except Canada, even though they may be manufactured here in Santa Braw.
Some cases in other countries they drugged you by here, of course one third or one fourth in some other country.
The argument over whether American drugs or priced right has almost dominated two years of committee debate.
We asked Senator Roman Husker of Nebraska, the chief opponent of keyfover, if he thinks drug prices are unreasonable.
Well, the price is the testimony we have had in our records and in the hearings.
Do not lead one to that conclusion if he is to follow any rule of logic or any well considered judgment.
And that is pretty much demonstrated by this.
That in the headlines we often saw the headline, 1000% profit on drugs.
Well, you know, when we get into the hearings, even when we get into the individual views of Senator Cufolver and Senator Carol, for example, they don't call it a profit, they call it a markup.
So that 100 pills, which cost a $1.50 to make from powder into the form of pills and put in a bottle, that cost a $0.50 and it's sold to the drug us for $15.
A markup of 1000%. But that is not profit because it does not take into consideration what it costs to build a plant and the equipment to maintain the equipment and ensure it and pay taxes and every dollar profit they make.
52 cents of it goes to the government and nor does it take into consideration sales expense warehousing promotion advertising nor even research.
So that 1000% markup does not represent profit.
Well, now you hear stories about the American armed services buying drugs from foreign countries instead of in the United States because the prices are cheaper.
What about those stories? Well, you see, they can do it and they have been doing it. I think it's a very short-sighted policy. There have been some purchases from Italy.
Italy has no patent system. They can come to America and they can pirate all the inventions we make here.
Now, there are purchases for lesser dollars and the immediate budget of the military agency that might buy Italian pills will be saved $X.
But the Italian factory has no fringe benefits. They have no social security. They have no retirement system and they do not pay taxes here.
For every dollar profit that an American factory might make from that sale to the government, the government gets 52 cents back.
When we consider the budget of the entire government and of the nation including some unemployment which might result from foreign purchases, then it is a very bad business judgment that impels these government agencies to buy abroad under those conditions.
Antiviotics, most of the companies were bidding to the government at just about the same price at about the 19 or 20 cents capsoons.
They found that the same drug manufactured in Denmark or in Italy by very good manufacturing companies could be purchased for about three cents a tablet.
So the government has saved a tremendous amount of money by purchasing them abroad.
Anyway, whether you take foreign prices, whether you take bids to the government, whatever you take while the prices are unreasonably high, I might point out that for several years now the pharmaceutical manufacturing industries have led all industries in profits on net worth averaging about 20% after taxes.
We asked Dr. Austin Smith, President of the pharmaceutical manufacturers association if American drugs are more expensive than foreign drugs.
No, in contrary to the statements that are so made this is not so. When one takes into consideration the difference in wages and cost of production.
If one were to look at the figures that have been assembled by various bodies and various consultants, some of these have been assembled by the PMA but many by other bodies.
One would find that drugs in America are not more expensive than elsewhere. In fact the person who works today spends less of his earned income for drugs bought in the United States than he does elsewhere.
We asked Dr. Smith if it is true that the drug industry leads other industries in profits.
No, this is not so. It does not lead the industries nor is the proper percentage as high as 20%.
Last year it was about 9.3 or 9.6 something like this. We turned on sales to preceding year of this or perhaps 0.3% greater. It has ranged from something like 9 to 14% over the past decade or perhaps 12 years.
I forgot an exact number of years but the percentage is roughly 10% just a little less. Now frankly I can see nothing wrong with making profit and drugs.
Any more than I can see with making profits and television equipment because profits and progress go hand in hand.
The original keyfover drug bill sought by increasing competition to force drug prices down. The opposition successfully cut those clauses out of the bill so we leave that subject aside for a while.
The second name of the keyfover heart bill was to give doctors who must prescribe these drugs better information about them.
This is the quantity of drugs received by one doctor in one week complete with advertising. A doctor has an almost impossible job knowing whether these claims for all these medicines are justified.
Dr. Frank first in Berg of Baltimore comments on this problem.
The average position depends pretty much on the drug house. He has little assurance that the drug has been adequately tested.
He assumes that the drug house that presents a product is presenting a product that is reputable. He may be skeptical but he's a good deal at the under the influence of the drug house pressures especially when so many new products come out each year.
And new combinations of drugs come out. He may be intrigued with a certain product. He may have some knowledge of the product but the bombardment for instance of new products in the field of tranquilizers and drugs for use and hypertension are so many that the average practitioner can't keep up with this.
Senator Keith Oliver tells of the kind of information he considers misleading and should be subject to federal action.
There's a just a sample of the kind of thing that I'm talking about that's given to doctors that misleading. This very impressive brochure here is a med draw.
And this is what the doctors receive inside the brochure is a X-ray which shows a person with a very bad ulcer and it says here before taking the medicine this is what it looks like.
And this says after therapy and here's another X-ray of a person that has no ulcer at all. Well we found out in the course of our hearings that they were X-rays not of the same person at all.
But the person who had the ulcer had never taken the medicine. The person who had was supposed to have been relieved by the medicine. Never took any medicine. Never had any ulcer.
And so that the pictures are entirely misleading and of course pictures have nothing to do with med draw for whatsoever.
The firm making that product has told the Keith Oliver committee it had no intention to mislead and has withdrawn that advertisement from circulation. The original Keith Oliver Hart bill had three aims.
Aim number one was to force reduced prices. A coalition of conservative Republicans and Southern Democrats cut that out of the bill on grounds that would deprive the drug industry of funds for further research.
The second purpose was to give doctors fuller and more reliable information about drugs they have to prescribe. Though weakened this function would still be served in the bill. Finally better tests and more time to make sure drugs are safe and effective.
This is now since the Thalidomide tragedy the main point of the bill and this happens to be an issue that there's least controversy about. More in a moment after this word from Nationwide Insurance.
The drug business is a complicated business to make judgments about the huge rewards available have caused some dishonesty and malpractice which called for the passage of the drug bill that came up for debate in the Senate today.
But doubtless most of the drug industry is pretty conscientious. We asked the president of the drug makers association Dr. Austin Smith to tell us how most firms try to make sure drugs are right.
In general a pharmaceutical firm when it's engaged in the pursuit of a new drug and its possibilities for a clinical use. Well first tested an animals. This may represent quite a variety of animals and it's certainly a large number of animals over a long period of time.
In general it takes about five years for a new drug to be tested from the time that the idea is born in the test tube until it appears on the market.
When the consultants for the pharmaceutical house whether they be employees of a firm or whether they be scientists from the outside and both are used are satisfied with the animal tests then the drug is tried by one or several well trained research workers on humans.
This is necessary because sometimes animals just are not predictable and furthermore sometimes in animals you cannot obtain the responses that you can on humans.
And when the researchers satisfied or the researchers are satisfied that the drug will do in humans what they hope it will do then they will try it on a larger number and then eventually will try it on still larger number to see if they can pick up some of these so-called odd reactions or idiosyncrasies that arise in individuals.
I have two comments of my own to conclude with both highly critical. The behavior of senators on the Eastland Committee which dealt with this bill should cause Americans to wonder what manner of men are legislating for us.
That committee sometime ago gutted the key father drug control bill to make it meaningless and pleasing the drug industry.
Now in the past few weeks they have hastily put the stuffing back in it and made it strong again. Now if senator key father was wrong about the need to stiffen control of drugs before he's still wrong nothing has happened to change it.
The thalidomide case is just one more of a continuing series not numerous but continuing of inadequately tested drugs.
I suggest that senator key father was in fact right all along the arguments of the coalition senators against him were wrong, spacious and contrary to the interests of the American people.
The question arises how much other urgently needed legislation are members of congress blocking by spacious arguments that please special interests because there's no simple obvious human tragedy to outrage American opinion and force congress to take action.
The final comment I would like to make is on drug prices which the coalition senators have prevented key father from cutting.
I think American drug prices are far too high. There is indubitable evidence that drugs are being sold to the American public at five and ten times and more times cost.
The United States Armed Services are as you've heard forced to go to foreign countries to buy drugs because the prices for the same drugs are much lower abroad.
The president of one American drug company admitted that he sold one kind of pill to us the public at forty dollars per thousand but sold the same drug to the US government at sixty cents a thousand to keep the government from buying a broth.
I'll repeat those figures they charge you in me forty dollars for what they sell to the government for sixty cents.
The industry and members of congress who argue exactly like its advertisements do say that profits are needed for research.
In fact for every dollar they put into research they put four dollars into high pressure promotion and selling.
The drug industry for all its fine achievements has because of its special nature to be more closely watched than it is.
But so do members of a congress elected to represent the whole public but who more and more seem to be the voice of something else.
Good night.
June and again next Wednesday for Howard K. Smith with news and comment presented by nationwide insurance.
Thank you.